arXiv:cond-mat/0001229v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 17 Jan 2000

1

The physics of the stripe quantum critical point in the superconducting
cuprates
C. Di Castro, L. Benfatto, S. Caprara, C. Castellani, and M. Grillia
a

INFM and Dipartimento di Fisica Università di Roma “La Sapienza”
00185 Rome, Italy
We elaborate on several observable consequences of the Quantum-Critical-Point scenario. In particular we show
that the strong k-dependent scattering of the quasiparticles with the quasi-critical charge and spin fluctuations
reproduces the main features of the low-energy spectral weights and of the observed Fermi surfaces. In the
underdoped cuprates the attractive k-dependent charge scattering drives the formation of the pseudogap at the
M points below the crossover temperature T ∗ . In this context we discuss models for pseudogap formation with
relevant scattering in the particle-particle and particle-hole channels. The experimental consequences for the
pair-fluctuation and for the pseudogap behavior are investigated.

1. THE STRIPE QUANTUM CRITICAL
POINT SCENARIO
The non-Fermi-liquid behavior of the normalstate of the cuprates has two major features depending on the doping (δ) regimes. Specifically,
(i) near optimal doping no energy scales seem to
be present besides the temperature (e.g. the inplane resistivity stays linear in T from just above
the critical temperature Tc ), while (ii) in the underdoped regime, new energy scales appear in the
form of pseudogaps, which persist well above Tc
up to a doping-dependent crossover temperature
T ∗ [1]. Starting in the deeply underdoped phase,
Tc increases with increasing doping and T ∗ decreases from high values of several hundreds of
kelvins until it merges with Tc near optimal doping. On the other hand, a Fermi-liquid-like behavior is observed in the overdoped materials.
Correspondingly, many different physical quantities display qualitatively different behaviors in
going from the under- to the optimally and to
the over-doped regimes. As schematically described in Fig. 1, the subdivision of the phase
diagram in three regions naturally arises from the
occurrence of an instability line starting at high
temperature in the deeply underdoped phase and
ending at zero temperature in a quantum critical point (QCP) located near optimal doping. In

this scheme the optimally doped and overdoped
regimes would be related to the quantum critical
(QC) and to the quantum disordered (QD) region
of the QCP respectively. The two regions are separated by a crossover line T̃ (δ). The underdoped
regime corresponds to the (quasi)-ordered region
below the instability line. However, precursor effects of the ordering could extend up to a higher
temperature T0 (δ).
It was shown that in strongly correlated systems (e.g., in the large-U Hubbard model with
an electron-phonon interaction and long-range
Coulomb forces) an incommensurate chargedensity-wave instability occurs when the doping
is reduced below a critical value δc [2–4]. This
tendency to order the charge arises as a compromise between the local tendency towards phase
separation and the electrostatic cost to segregate
charged carriers [5]. For reasonable values of the
parameters this instability line starts near optimal doping at zero temperature. In the underdoped regime this charge ordering tendency occurs below a doping-dependent TCDW (δ) instability line. The charge ordering strongly mixes
with spin degrees of freedom and gives rise to the
so-called stripe phase.
As shown in Ref. [2,4] a crucial consequence
of the stripe formation is the occurrence nearby

2
T0

~
T
T*

QUANTUM
CRITICAL

T

CDW

QUANTUM
DISORDERED

PSEUDOGAP
DYNAM.
STRIPES

SUPERCOND.

TC

δ

c

δ

STRIPE-QCP

Figure 1. Schematic structure of the temperature
vs. doping δ phase diagram around the StripeQCP.

the instability of a singular effective interaction,
strongly dependent on momentum, doping, and
temperature:
Γ(q, ω) ≈ Ũ −

V
κ2 + |q − qc |2 − iγω

(1)

where Ũ is the residual repulsive interaction between the quasiparticles, γ is a damping parameter, and qc is the wavevector of the CDW instability. The crucial parameter κ2 = ξc−2 is the
inverse square of the correlation length of charge
order and provides a measure of the distance from
criticality. At T = 0, in the overdoped regime, κ2
is linear in the doping deviation from the critical
concentration, κ2 = a(δ − δc ). In Ref. [2] the
instability was found at δc ≈ 0.2, with qc ∼ 1.
On the other hand, in the QC region above δc ,
κ2 ∼ T , according to the behavior of a Gaussian
QCP. In the underdoped regime κ2 vanishes approaching the instability line TCDW (δ).
The occurrence of singular interactions near the
QCP and near the instability line determines the
physical properties of the cuprates. In particular, the non-Fermi-liquid behavior characteristic of the optimally doped materials is a signature of the QCP [2]. In the next section we report on some spectroscopic consequences of the

strong scattering mediated by charge fluctuations
near optimal doping. On the other hand in the
overdoped region the term κ2 = a(δ − δc ) reduces the scattering and determines a region of
Fermi-liquid behavior. In the underdoped compounds, when the instability line TCDW is approached, a singular scattering between the quasiparticles is again mediated by the charge fluctuations at wavevectors q ≈ q c . Thus the region
near TCDW (δ) is characterized by a strong effective interaction both in the particle-particle (p-p)
and the particle-hole (p-h) channels, with a new
doping-dependent energy scale. In both cases a
pseudogap is an expected outcome, as it will be
discussed in Section 3.
2. SPECTRAL PROPERTIES NEAR OPTIMAL DOPING
The charge fluctuations couple with spin degrees of freedom since in the hole-poor regions the
system is locally closer to half-filling where antiferromagnetic correlations are more pronounced.
Both charge and spin fluctuations then mediate a
nearly singular scattering between the quasiparticles, strongly affecting the spectral properties. In
order to compare the outcomes of this scattering
with the ARPES experiments, mostly performed
on optimally doped Bi2212 [6], we assumed [7]
a tight-binding model with the band parameters
commonly accepted for this material. The exchange of QC charge fluctuations at wavevectors
qc = ±(0.4π, −0.4π), and QC antiferromagnetic
spin fluctuations at qs = (π, π) was then considered within a perturbative approach. Since in
general the critical wavevector is model and doping dependent, the present choice of qc was suggested to match the experiments [6]. The resulting single-particle spectra are characterized by
(i) a transfer of spectral weight from the quasiparticle peak to the incoherent shadow peaks;
(ii) a redistribution of the low-energy spectral
weight with a modification of the FS; (iii) a strong
anisotropic suppression of spectral weight around
the M points (±π, 0) and (0, ±π). All these features have a counterpart in the experiments.
In this framework one can also investigate the
bilayer structure of Bi2212 and explain the puz-

3
0.045

T*
Tc
LE/2

0.04
0.035
Tc, T*, LE

zling absence of bonding-antibonding band splitting. According to the band calculations [8], we
introduced [9] a k-dependent interplane hopping
t⊥ (k) = t⊥ |γk | with γk = 21 (cos kx − cos ky ).
t⊥ (k) is large near the M points only. The intraplane scattering, however, mostly reduces the
quasiparticle spectral weight near the M points.
Thus, within our scenario, the absence of detectable band splitting in ARPES spectra follows
directly from the in-plane spectral properties.
The interaction mediated by the quasicritical fluctuations also provides an effective pairing
mechanism. In this regard approaching the superconducting region from the overdoped regime, the
doping and the temperature dependences of the
κ2 term in the QD and QC regimes give rise to a
non-trivial increase of Tc followed by a saturation
around optimal doping [3]. The more involved
case of the underdoped regime, with pseudogap
formation will be discussed in the next section.

0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.005
0
0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2
δ

Figure 2. Doping dependence of T ∗ , Tc , and the
zero-temperature LE. We assumed the T ∗ (δ)
dependence measured in Bi2212 [11] and used
c = 2.5 and V = 90 meV to reproduce the experimentally observed values of the LE in the
underdoped region and the maximum Tc .

3. PARTICLE-PARTICLE AND PARTICLE-HOLE PSEUDOGAP
The effect of the stripe instability can be more
dramatic in underdoped materials, when the system approaches the instability line at temperatures T ∼ TCDW (δ). In this case, near TCDW (δ)
the critical fluctuations at wavevectors near qc
can mediate a large effective interaction between
the quasiparticles states k and k′ such that k −
k′ ∼ qc . The generic outcome is that states of
the Fermi surface near the M points are strongly
interacting, while quasiparticles around the diagonals (Γ − X and Γ − Y directions) are less affected. This finds a correspondence in ARPES experiments [10,11], where at T ∗ the Leading Edge
shift (LE) starts to develop near the M points.
Indeed the strong interaction near the M points
can give rise to pairing and gaps both in the p-p
and p-h channels. Although it is quite natural
that both channels contribute to the formation of
the pseudogap below the crossover temperature
T ∗ , the two limiting cases, when a single channel (either p-p or p-h) dominates the pseudogap
formation, are simpler to analyze and each one of
them shows relevant aspects of the physics of the
cuprates.

In the first mechanism we propose, the pseudogap opens due to incoherent pairing in the p-p
channel. The strong momentum dependence of
the effective interaction (1) plays in this regard
a crucial role in selecting the quasiparticle states
which are most strongly paired. This leads to
non-trivial fluctuation effects, because strongly
paired states near the M points coexist with
weakly interacting quasiparticles along the diagonals. This situation is quite different from the
case described by a single superconducting order
parameter ∆(k) = ∆s g(k). In the present case,
indeed, the momentum dependence of the effective pairing interaction not only produces the k
structure of g(k), but also confers different fluctuation properties in k-space to the Cooper pairs depending on their strongly or weakly paired character. This physical situation has recently been
described within a two-gap model [12]. In this latter framework, incoherent tightly bound Cooper
pairs around the M points are formed at T ∗ , while
phase coherence is established at a lower temperature Tc by coupling to the stiffness of the weakly
bound pairs near the diagonal directions.

4
The scattering in the p-h channel can provide
an additional mechanism for the pseudogap formation. If this happens, the issue arises of the
interplay between the preformed p-h pseudogap
and an additional BCS pairing for the weakly interacting quasiparticles. While this issue was discussed in Ref. [13] for a simple isotropic pseudogap, in Ref. [14] a specific band structure is considered, which includes a preformed k-dependent
gap. The whole complication of the strong scattering around the M points is schematized by this
preformed p-h gap ∆0 (δ, T )γk , which separates
the conduction and the valence band, and vanishes at the points (±π/2, ±π/2). Each band
has a width 4t ≃ 1 eV, t being the nearestneighbor hopping. We assume T ∗ (δ) as the critical line for the preformed gap formation and take
∆0 (δ, T ) = cT ∗ (δ)g(T /T ∗ (δ)), where c is a fitting
parameter, g(0) = 1, g(1) = 0, and g(x) interpolates smoothly between these two limits. A suitable weak pairing V in the Cooper channel promotes a d-wave superconducting gap ∆s (δ, T )γk
in the low valence band of the hole doped system. The mean-field BCS critical temperature
Tc vanishes at δ = 0, increases with increasing
doping, and reaches a maximum at δc when the
chemical potential crosses the peak which individuates the pseudogap region in the density of
states, and then decreases. Therefore T ∗ and Tc
merge near optimum doping and the Tc (δ) curve
has the characteristic bell-shaped form in reasonable agreement with the experiments (see Fig. 2).
The quasiparticle spectra are characterized by
a LE, i.e. a finite minimum distance of the quasiparticle peak from the Fermi level, which persists in the normal state and is largest at the M
points, where LE ≃ ∆0 − |µ|. In underdoped
SC regime, the LE is controlled by two parameters, as seen in experiments [15,16]. The M points
are dominated by the normal-state pseudogap,
whereas the nodal region are controlled by ∆s ,
which scales as Tc . In the overdoped regime the
LE ≃ ∆s .
The above preformed gap accounts for most
of the non-mean-field effects by the input of a
normal-state pseudogap ∆0 (δ, T ). In particular,
the model yields a phase diagram in good qualitative agreement with the experiments.

On the other hand, the bifurcation between T ∗
and Tc nearby optimum doping is also an outcome
of the two-gap model [12]. Clearly, the two models assign a different relevance to the effect of the
strong QCP effective interaction in the p-p and
p-h channels, and select just one of the two channels as the most affected one. It is quite plausible
that the stripe fluctuations will indeed produce
non-Fermi-liquid- and non-mean-field-like effects
in both channels. However, whether the results
discussed above within each of the two models
should cooperate to produce a better quantitative description of the cuprates, is still an open
problem under investigation.
REFERENCES
1. For a recent review see, e.g. T. Timusk and
B. Statt, Rep. Prog. Phys. 62, (1999) 61.
2. C. Castellani, C. Di Castro, and M. Grilli,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, (1995) 4650.
3. A. Perali, et al., Phys. Rev. B 54, (1996)
16216.
4. C. Castellani, C. Di Castro, and M. Grilli, J.
Phys. Chem. Solids 59, (1998) 1694.
5. U. Löw, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, (1994)
1918.
6. N. L. Saini, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, (1997)
3467.
7. S. Caprara, et al., Phys. Rev. B 59, (1999)
14980.
8. O. K. Andersen, et al., Phys. Rev. B49,
(1994) 4145.
9. S. Caprara and M. Grilli, Journal de Physique
IV (Colloques) 10, (1999) 337.
10. D. S. Marshall, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 76,
(1996) 4871.
11. H. Ding, et al., Nature 382, (1996) 51; J.
Phys. Chem. Solids 59, (1998) 1888.
12. A. Perali, et al., cond-mat/9912363, C.
Castellani, et al., this proceeding.
13. P. Nozières and F. Pistolesi, Eur. Phys. J. B
10, (1999) 649.
14. L. Benfatto, S. Caprara, and C. Di Castro,
preprint (2000).
15. C. Panagopoulos and T. Xiang, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 81, (1998) 2336.
16. G. Deutscher, Nature 397, (1999) 410.

