A Mechanism for Cutting Carbon Nanotubes with a Scanning Tunneling Microscope

arXiv:cond-mat/0001225v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 17 Jan 2000

Angel Rubioa,b , S. Peter Apellb,c , Liesbeth C. Venemad and Cees Dekkerd
a. Departamento de Fı́sica Teórica, Universidad de Valladolid, E-47011 Valladolid, Spain
b. Departamento de Fı́sica de Materiales, Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea Aptdo. 1072 San Sebastian 20080, Basque Country
and Donostia International Physics Center, San Sebastian, Spain
c. Department of Applied Physics, Chalmers University of Technology and Göteborg University, S-41296 Göteborg, Sweden
d. Department of Applied Sciences and DIMES, Delft University of Technology, Lorentzweg 1, 2628 CJ Delft, The Netherlands
(February 1, 2008)
We discuss the local cutting of single-walled carbon nanotubes by a voltage pulse to the tip of a
scanning tunneling microscope. The tip voltage (| V |≥ 3.8 eV) is the key physical quantity in the
cutting process. After reviewing several possible physical mechanisms we conclude that the cutting
process relies on the weakening of the carbon-carbon bonds through a combination of localized
particle-hole excitations induced by inelastically tunneling electrons and elastic deformation due
to the electric field between tip and sample. The carbon network releases part of the induced
mechanical stress by forming topological defects that act as nucleation centers for the formation of
dislocations that dynamically propagate towards bond-breaking.
PACS numbers: 61.16.Ch, 61.48.+c, 62.20.Fe

discuss some relevant physical mechanisms that can result in breaking of tubes and then select one as the most
promising mechanism. We analyze the proposed cutting
mechanism in Section IV in more detail and compare the
theoretical model to the experimental results. We end
the paper with a short discussion and outlook.

I. INTRODUCTION

Since the discovery of carbon nanotubes in 1991 [1] a
lot of progress has been made in the synthesis as well as
in the characterization of the electronic, optical and mechanical properties of these remarkable molecules [2–5].
They are promising structures to use as components in
submicrometer-scale devices [6,7] and in nanocomposites
[8]. A carbon nanotube can be visualized as a graphite
sheet rolled up seamlessly into a cylinder. They have
diameters in the range of 0.6-30 nm and are many microns in length. Depending on the synthesis conditions
they can appear in multi-walled or single-walled configurations [1,9,10]. The tube symmetry determines not only
the electronic (metallic or semiconducting) character [4]
but also the plastic/brittle behavior [11,12]. The special geometry makes the nanotubes excellent candidates
for mesoscopic quantum wires. Evidence for (1D) quantum confinement was obtained from electronic transport
measurements on single-walled nanotubes [13]. The transition from one-dimensional (wire) to zero-dimensional
(quantum dot) behavior can be achieved directly by cutting a long nanotube to a shorter length. This has
been recently done by Venema et al [14] by applying
voltage pulses to the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) located just above a nanotube. Discrete energy states, consistent with a 1D particle-in-abox model [15,16], have been measured with STM spectroscopy in such short tubes [15]. The possibility to control the length of nanotubes by the cutting technique is
of interest for various applications of carbon nanotubes
in nanoscale devices [5,6].
In this paper we discuss a number of possible mechanisms that can explain the experimental observed cutting
of tubes by a voltage pulse to the STM tip for singlewalled carbon nanotubes. In the following Section the
experimental data is briefly described. In Section III, we

II. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

As found earlier [14] individual carbon nanotubes can
be locally cut by applying a voltage pulse to the tip of a
scanning tunneling microscope (STM). The carbon nanotubes that were studied were single-walled, synthesized
by a laser vaporization technique and consisted mainly of
∼ 1.4 nm diameter nanotubes (material from R.E. Smalley and coworkers) [9]. Samples were prepared by depositing a dispersion of nanotubes in 1,2-dichloroethane
onto single-crystal Au(111) surfaces. The experiments
were done both at room temperature and at 4 K.
Nanotubes are cut by the following procedure: During
imaging of a nanotube in constant-current mode, scanning is interrupted and the STM tip moves to a selected
position on the nanotube. Feedback is then switched off
and a voltage pulse between tip and sample is applied for
1 ms. After this pulse, the feedback is switched on again
and scanning resumes where imaging was interrupted.
The distance between the STM tip and the nanotube
during a pulse is determined by the settings for the feedback current and voltage. Fig. 1(b) shows an example of
a nanotube that has been cut into various smaller tube
pieces as a result of voltage pulses of -3.75 V applied at
the positions marked in Fig. 1(a). Often, tube parts beneath the STM tip are picked up during a pulse. This
usually leads to degradation of the tip quality. Cleaning
of the tip can then be done by applying voltages on the
gold surface, away from the nanotube.
1

The cutting efficiency as a function of the bias voltage
applied during a pulse is shown in Fig. 2. This experimental result provides essential input for the theoretical
modeling of the cutting mechanism described below. The
efficiency at a specific voltage is defined as the number
of successful cutting events divided by the total number
of applied pulses at that voltage. A large number (about
150) of voltage pulses were applied at room temperature
in a range of 1 to 6 V, at positive and negative polarity. The pulses were applied on various nanotubes, both
semiconducting and metallic. To study the dependence
of cutting efficiency on the distance between the STM tip
and the nanotube during a pulse, feedback currents were
varied between 20 pA and 1 nA and feedback voltages
between 0.1 and 3 V were used. No dependence of cutting efficiency on the tunnel distance was found. Pulses
applied with various feedback currents and voltages are
therefore included in same graph of Fig. 2. The main
experimental results are listed below:

III. PHYSICAL CONCEPTS FOR THE CUTTING
MECHANISM

In this Section we survey a number of possible physical
mechanisms for the breaking of nanotubes by a voltage
pulse that are interrelated to various degrees [17].

1. Shear pressure; Simply crashing the tip into the
tube could be a possible cutting mechanism. However, experimentally we find that the tubes are
moved laterally when the tip is brought close to
the tube. This is related to the large reversible elastic response (flexibility) exhibited by carbon nanotubes [18]. Simulations of C60 -molecules impact
on carbon nanotubes have shown that even large
radial forces produce reversible elastic distortions
indicating that crashing the tip onto the tube is not
an efficient method to cut [19]. Furthermore, there
is no obvious energy scale of 4 eV in the crashing
process.

• We find a sharp threshold for the voltage of 3.8 ±
0.2 V for cutting nanotubes. This is independent
of polarity. Below 3.6 V, nanotubes could almost
never be cut. Above 4 V, tubes were almost always
cut.

2. Crack propagation; This is related to the propagation of voids and cracks already present in asgrown nanotubes under low (tensile) loads. However, there is no evidence, from STM or otherwise,
for the presence of local defects or cracks in the
SWNT material studied here. This mechanism is
hence not considered to be important.

• The cutting efficiency is independent of the feedback tunnel current or voltage. The tunnel resistance has been varied over three orders of magnitude, which changes the tunnel distance significantly. This demonstrates that the determining
physical quantity for cutting is the voltage, rather
than the electric field.
• The cutting procedure appears to be effective for
different types of nanotubes. We observe no dependence on the electronic character (i.e. semiconducting or metallic) of a tube.

3. Collective excitations (plasmons); Plasmons excited by inelastic electron scattering of the tunneling current can decay into electron-hole pairs,
phonons or other excitations that induce a polarization or charge separation in the tube. Eventually the release of the plasmon energy leads to
a break through local heating and atom evaporation. Due to the particular cylindrical geometry of
carbon nanotubes we expect to have a π-plasmon
excitation at about 5 eV [20]. This has been confirmed experimentally [21] for SWNTs of ∼ 1.4 nm
diameter. The decay of the plasmon excitation into
atom evaporation is a well-known phenomenon in
metallic clusters where the surface-plasmon energy
is of the order of the binding energy leading to
atom-evaporation as an effective decaying mechanism of the collective excitations [22]. In the case of
tubes with an internal binding energy greater than
∼ 7 eV/atom (as for most carbon solids; see Table
I), however, multiple-plasmon excitations need to
be active to induce transitions which weaken the
carbon bonds. This puts this mechanism behind
first-order models. However, it can enhance the
probability of electronic excitations (see below).

• Nanotubes can be cut at room temperature as well
as at 4 K.
• Nanotubes within bundles can be cut as efficiently
as isolated single-wall tubes (see for an example
Fig. 3).
• Upon decreasing the tunnel distance considerably
by increasing the tunnel current beyond 1 nA, nanotubes are moved away laterally by the STM tip
during imaging.
• The separation between nanotube ends created by
a cut varies significantly in size, from a few nm to 20
nm. Sometimes, the tube ends are displaced after
the cut. Fig. 4(a) for example shows a strongly bent
nanotube on which two voltage pulses were applied
near the marked positions. Fig. 4(b) shows that the
three tube parts separated by the cuts were moved
significantly by the cutting events. Most likely, the
nanotube was fixed on the substrate under some
strain that was released by the cutting.
2

4. Localized particle-hole excitations; This mechanism
is concerned with the symmetry-allowed interband
excitation of localized σ-states to states of π ∗ character near the Fermi level. These electronic excitations leave localized σ-holes behind which weaken
the C-C bonds by creating possible nucleation sites
for breaking of the tube. Electrons tunneling inelastically between tip and tube are the source for
these excitations. The probability for this process is favored by the local electric field at the tiptube interface, which, independent of the metallic
or semiconducting behavior, enhances the number
of possible bonding/antibonding transitions triggering the bond-breaking. The density of states
(DOS) for a (10,10) nanotube, which is metallic,
is shown in Fig. 5. Near the Fermi level, the
DOS is finite and constant. At higher energies,
sharp peaks can be observed which are the Van
Hove singularities at the subband onsets [23]. At
above/below 3.6 eV from the Fermi level the interband excitations involve states with a predominant σ ∗ /σ-localized character with a small curvature induced σ − π/σ ∗ − π ∗ hybridization. The
excitations of the σ/σ ∗ states have been found in
nanotubes to lead to a broad spectral feature in
the experimental electron-energy loss-spectra close
to the π-plasmon excitation [21], similar to the case
of σ − π ∗ interband transitions in graphite [3]. This
interband excitation involving localized σ-states introduces a natural energy threshold for the cutting
process to take place around 3.6 eV. This agrees
quite well with the experimental observation of a
sharp threshold voltage for cutting of 3.8 eV that
is independent of polarity.

ple. These two processes together induce topological defects and drive the system to mechanical instability. In
the next section we present a more detailed analysis of
mechanisms 4 and 5 as well as specific molecular dynamics simulations of bond rearrangement and bond-breaking
driven by the stress introduced in the nanotube.

IV. THE CUTTING MECHANISM

In the previous section we have sorted out a possible
scenario for the cutting of nanotubes by a voltage pulse.
This section discusses in more detail the bond weakening due to mechanisms 4 and 5 described in the previous
section. The formation and propagation of topological
defects due to the bond weakening will also be discussed.

A. Localized electronic excitation

In order to understand the role of electronic excitations in the bond-weakening [27] and cutting process we
show in Fig. 5 how the density of states of a (10,10)
SWNT is modified by an applied electric field in the direction perpendicular to the tube axis. Here the structural relaxation and electronic calculations were done
in the framework of the ab-initio total-energy densityfunctional pseudopotential theory [28]. We find that the
field tends to increase the nanotube’s lattice parameter
by a few %, nearly independent of the polarity of the
applied bias potential. Eventually, as the field strength
increases, the structure can reach a state which is not in
a stable equilibrium for the carbon atoms any more [29].
In the calculations shown in Fig. 5 the field acts on
the whole tube for fixed atomic coordinates. Results are
shown corresponding to electric fields accessible in the experimental setup (up to 1 eV/Å). One could also take into
account the spatial variation of the applied field related
to the tip-size. In that case there are distinct regions:
one far from the tip where the electronic properties of
the tube are dictated by the isolated tube and the other
just beneath the tip where the electronic properties are
modified by the applied field. From Fig. 5 we see that the
applied field results in the appearance of localized levels
which increases the DOS in an energy region close to the
Fermi level (this effect is related to the bond-weakening
and bond-length increase in carbon nanotubes under an
applied voltage discussed above). The increase of density of states near the Fermi level enhances the number
of possible transitions that can take place. Semiconducting nanotubes have a DOS comparable to that of metallic
nanotubes, but have an energy gap with zero DOS near
the Fermi energy. However, the electric field will induce
states within the gap, similar to the increase of DOS
near the Fermi level for metallic nanotubes. This allows
localized particle-hole excitations to take place also for
semiconducting nanotubes. Indeed, in the experiments

5. Field-induced elastic deformation; The large electric field from the tip apex causes significant
changes in the C-C bond lengths. This introduces a
mechanical instability in the tube that triggers the
formation of topological defects (double pentagonheptagon defect pairs, see Fig. 6) [24,25] that dynamically evolve towards breaking of the tube (see
next section for details) [26]. This effect is enhanced by the stress introduced in the nanotube
during the electronic excitation of localized σ-states
(as discussed in the previous mechanism). The induced stress acts on the tube for the whole 1 ms
applied voltage pulse which is long enough for the
formation and evolution of the dislocation cores.
The combination of the last two processes is the most
likely to constitute the basic mechanism for cutting of
nanotubes. The cutting process then is triggered by the
inelastic electron excitations involving transitions of localized σ-states at about ∼ 3.6 eV. This accounts for
the threshold voltage found in the experiments. The CC bonds are further weakened by the mechanical stress
induced by the large electric field between tip and sam3

no difference is found in cutting efficiency between semiconducting and metallic nanotubes.
It may appear that any electronic mechanism should be
current dependent. However the number of broken bonds
is far less than the number of available electrons in the
cutting process. The excitations become possible because
of the large current available in the STM experiment.
The experimental range of currents during the cutting
process (more than 50 nA) is such that during the 1 ms
pulse more than thousand electrons are involved in inelastic events. This means that we are in a saturated regime
where cutting can in principle be achieved independent
of the current. This situation can be compared to the
situation of cutting Si:H bonds with an STM, where the
desorption yield was found to be independent of bias or
current once the bias is large enough [30]. The formation of topological defects is a natural way of releasing
the excitation energy and naturally triggers the breaking
process.

F =

(2)

where V is the applied bias voltage and d the tip-tube
distance. We see that it depends on the inverse separation. In this equation we have neglected the hollow inner
part of the tube that would reduce the force by approximately 20 %, but not its dependence on d and V . With
V=4 Volts, a distance of d=10 Å and R=100 Å (a reasonable value in STM when simulating a tip with a sphere
[35]) we find a force of 15 nN [36]. This is independent of
the polarity of the bias, as found experimentally. Soler et
al. [37] experimentally found that graphite surface would
be experiencing a 1 Å deformation in an STM configuration for a force of the order of 1 nN. Notice however that
the relevant elastic constants in their case are related to
the weak interlayer bonding in graphite as reflected in
the corresponding c33 and c44 elastic contansts. These
are much smaller than the c11 constant (reflecting the
strong intralayer sp2 -like bond) which is relevant in our
case (see Table II) [38].
Using now Eqn. (1) and inserting Y ∼ 1 TPa, we find
that for a distortion δ/L higher than the 10% Lindeman
criterion, L has at least to be about 5 nm (of course
strongly depending on N). The 10 % change in the bond
lengths can lead to brittle behavior (see below) [11]. All
this happens for electric fields of the order of 1 V/Å which
are in the experimental range. Notice that this pull of
electro-magnetic origin is happening over the length covered by the tip shape and drops dramatically outside the
tip providing a highly “distorted” region.

B. Field-induced elastic deformation

We study the tip-field induced mechanical stress in
the nanotube within a macroscopical approach. An argument for using a macroscopic model is that the specific elastic constants of single wall nanotubes determined
from experiments follow quite well the predictions for the
macroscopic elasticity theory (in terms of the Young’s
modulus, Poisson ratio and torsion and bending elastic constants [31]). Although the ultimate description
of the fracture mechanics is a complex phenomenon that
requires both macroscopic and microscopic descriptions,
we thus rely on a continuous model to get a first estimate of the parameters involved in the process. The
typical energy of the distortion process is such that it
corresponds to bond-breaking energies for carbon compounds (see Table I) or to displacements which fulfill a
Lindeman melting criterion [32] of a 10% change in bond
distance.
We consider the tube as a thin hollow rod which is
clamped to the surface by van der Waals forces. In the
cutting process, the tube is distorted by the tip in a region the size of the tip (length-scale L). For a hollow
tube (inner radius a and outer radius b) of bending inertia I=π(b4 − a4 )/4 and Young’s modulus Y, we expect a
relative deformation δ for an applied force F of [33]
δ
F L2
≈
L
NY I

ǫ0 √
Rb(2πV )2 .
d

C. Dynamical bond-breaking

Now we address how the electronically and mechanically induced strain can lead to the breakdown of a tube.
A plausible mechanism is the Stone-Wales (SW) transformation leading to bond-rotation defects [24]. This comprises of a pair of pentagon-heptagon defects obtained
by a simple C-C bond–rotation in the hexagonal network, see Fig. 6. These defects are the main source of
strain release for tubes under tension [11,12] and determine the overall electronic character of the tube [25]. The
pentagon-heptagon defect behaves as a single edge dislocation in the tube circumference. Once nucleated, the
pair dislocations can relax further by successive StoneWales transformations.
We have performed molecular dynamics simulations of
strain-induced defect and plastic/brittle behavior using
the tight binding parameterization of Ref. [39] that reproduces quite well density-functional calculations within
the local-density-approximation [40]. The computed
(T=0K) SW defect formation energy in an armchair nanotube at different applied strains shows that for a tensile
strain of about 5% for a (10,10) tube and 12% for a (12,0)
tube, the defect geometry is energetically favourable over

(1)

where N is a number of order 10-100 depending on details
of the modeling such as force distribution and boundary
conditions. We estimate the force F from the interaction
between a sphere of radius R (representing the tip curvature) and a tube of outer radius b (7.5 Å in our situation)
to be [34]:
4

the size of the local creening charge (colective mode) involved in the photon
emission. Typical resolution can
√
be estimated as Rd ∼ 20Å using our length scales introduced above [35,42]. A related topic would be field
emission from nano-tubes.
To summarize, we have characterized in detail the possible mechanisms responsible for the breaking up of tubes
as found experimentally. Nanotube cutting is a promising technique for the emerging field of nano-manipulation
and nanodevices. More studies will have to be made to
understand all the interesting physics taking place at this
nanoscale level.

the perfect tube [41]. The activation barrier for the formation of defects is lowered by the applied tension. Indeed the activation barrier for bond rotation in a (10,10)
nanotube is found to reduce from 5.6 eV at zero strain to
3 eV at 10% strain; similar reduction is observed for the
barrier for separation of the pentagon-heptagon dislocation cores. The dynamics of these defects are dictated
by the tube chirality as well as the applied tension and
temperature. In particular at high applied strain and
low temperature all tubes are brittle [11]. In the simulations restricted to armchair tubes, we observed that
after the nucleation of the first SW-defect, octagonal and
higher order rings start to appear as the applied strain
is increased. This leads to brittle behavior and shows
the important role of the strain induced by the applied
voltage. The simulation time scale for the formation and
evolution of these defects are of the order of nanoseconds, much shorter than the applied voltage pulse of 1
ms. We thus expect the natural nucleation and evolution
of these defects beneath the tip region of the STM, leading to a bond breaking and possible local collapse of the
structure.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by grants from
the Swedish Natural Science Research Council, Iberdrola S.A, JCyL (Grant: VA28/99) and the European Community TMR contracts ERB-FMRX-CT980198 and ERBFMRX-CT96-0067 (DG12-MIHT). SPA
and AR are grateful to the enlightening atmosphere at
the University of the Basque Country where most of this
work was done. We thank H.L.J. Temminck Tuinstra for
help with the experiments and acknowledge discussions
with J.W.G. Wildöer, D. Tomanek, P. Bernier and M.
Buongiorno-Nardelli. The work at Delft was supported
by the Dutch Foundation for Fundamental Research of
Matter (FOM).

V. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

From the previous discussion we conclude that the applied voltage at the STM tip creates: (i) excitation of
localized σ-bonding states, (ii) a change in the density
of states around the Fermi level making the tubes more
metallic-like and, (iii) an overall distortion of the region
beneath the tip, leading to the formation and evolution
of strain-induced topological defects. These processes together are responsible for the cutting mechanism with the
threshold voltage of ∼ 4 V. The proposed mechanism relies only on the applied voltage. It appears that within
the experimental values, the tip-tube distance does not
change the results.
It would be interesting to attempt the cutting in multiwalled carbon nanotubes also. The cutting will probably
not work for these nanotubes since the inner layers are
able to accomodate the stress acting on the outer layers.
Furthermore we expect the inter-tube van der Waals interaction in multi-walled nanotubes to be strong enough
to partially release the concentration of elastic strain so
that only atoms of the outer surface will be affected. This
is different to the case of nanotubes in bundles, where the
cutting process is as effective as for isolated nanotubes
(see Fig. 3). In this case the other tubes in the bundle
act as a global support similar to the gold substrate for
the isolated SWNTs.
It may be interesting to see if the breaking process is
accompanied by photon emission to any significant degree to gain further information about the energetic of
the possible processes. Photon emission provides a signal that is dependent on the local physical environment
beneath the tip with a spatial resolution determined by

[1] S. Iijima, Nature 354, 56 (1991); P.M. Ajayan and S.
Iijima, Nature 361, 333 (1993).
[2] See for example the special issues on Nanotubes in Carbon 33 (1996); J. Appl. Phys. A 67 (1998); 68 (1999).
[3] M.S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, P.C. Eklund, Science
of Fullerenes and Carbon Nanotubes (Academic Press
Inc., San Diego, 1996); M.S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus,
K. Sugihara, I.L. Spain and H.A. Goldberg, Graphite
Fibers and Filaments, Springer Verlag (1988).
[4] T.W. Ebbesen, Carbon nanotubes: preparation and properties (CRC Press, New York, 1997).
[5] C. Dekker, Physics Today 52, 22 (1999).
[6] S.J. Tans, A.R.M. Verschueren and C.Dekker, Nature,
393 49 (1998).
[7] J. Liu, A. G. Rinzler, H. Dai, J. H. Hafner, R. K. Bradley,
P. J. Boul, A. Lu, T. Iverson, K. Shelimov, C. B. Huffman, F. Rodriguez-Macias, Y. Shon, T. R. Lee, D. T.
Colbert, and R. E. Smalley, Science, 280, 1253 (1998).
P.G. Collins, A. Zettl, H. Bando, A. Thess, R.E. Smalley,
Science 278, 100 (1997).
[8] S. Curran, P.M. Ajayan, W. Blau, D.L. Carroll, J.. Coleman, A.B. Dalton, A.P.Davey, A. Drudy, B. McCarthy,
S. Maier and A. Strevens, Advanced Materials 10, 1091

5

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]

[26] The mechanical deformation might also lead, in some
conditions, to jump to contact of tip and sample with
potential material transfer between the two. The jumpto-contact voltage can be estimated from the derivative
of the elastic and electrostatic forces in equilibrium [O.
Hansen, J.T. Ravnkilde, U. Quaade, K. Stokbro and F.
Grey, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 5572 (1998)], to be of the order of a few volts depending on the effective tip-sample
distance. The jump-to-contact voltage is very sensitive
to the equilibrium tunnel gap. This indicates that it is
unlikely that we are in this regime here.
[27] Removing or adding an electron from/to a tube bond
can introduce stresses in the network. So, for instance,
the bond length of the C2 -dimer increases from 1.24 to
1.30 Å when taking one electron out, which is a 5% effect.
However in more confined structures (e.g. benzene) the
effect is less relevant as long as the electron is removed
from the π-cloud.
[28] W.E. Pickett, Comput. Phys. Rep. 9, 115 (1989);
M.C. Payne, M.P. Teter, D.C. Allan, T.A. Arias, J.D.
Joannopoulos, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 1045 (1992).
[29] The calculations show a slight asymmetry in the response
of the carbon nanotube with respect of the applied bias
polarity for potentials larger than ±4eV (in agreement
with calculations performed by D. Tomanek, private communication 1999). Note that the field introduces a quite
large mechanical stress in the system. We can estimate
from a simple displaced harmonic oscillator model (displacement ∆x) the field strength k∆x/e necessary for a
10% change in bond distance (Lindemann melting criterion [32]). Using k-values from Table I we obtain values of
the order of 4V/Å for the single bond. This corresponds
to a change in elastic energy of 6-7 eV. Once this energy
is higher than bonding-antibonding transition energies
it cannot be accommodated and the bond will tend to
break.
[30] Ph. Avouris, R.E. Walkup, A.R Rossi, H.C. Akpati, P.
Nordlander, T.-C. Shen, G.C. Abeln and J.W. Lyding,
Surf. Sci. 363, 368 (1996).
[31] E. Hernández, C. Goze, P. Bernier and A. Rubio, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 80, 4502 (1998); L. Vaccarini, C. Goze, L.
Henrard, E. Hernández, P. Bernier and A. Rubio, Carbon (in press).
[32] F.A. Lindemann, Z. Physik 11, 609 (1910).
[33] L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifschitz, Theory of Elasticity,
2nd ed. (Pergamon, Oxford 1975).
[34] B. Derjagin, Kolloid Z. 69, 155 (1934); L.R. White, J.
Colloid interface Sci. 95, 286 (1983). To compute the
force we use the Derjagin approximation, that was later
on elaborated by White. In this approach, the force between two objects is related to the curvatures involved
and the interaction energy E(d) per unit area for the
corresponding planar situation: F = 2πRef f E(d) where
d is the separation between the two solids (average distance between tip and tube in our situation) and Ref f
expresses
the curvatures involved and is given by: Ref f =
q
√
b
≈ Rb. The latter approximation is valid when
R R+b
R≫b, which applies to our case. The interaction energy
for two planar surfaces making up a capacitor with a bias
voltage V is the classical charging energy: E(d) = 12 CV 2 .

(1998); P.M. Ajayan, L.S. Schadler, C. Giannaris and A.
Rubio (submitted for publication).
A. Thess, R. Lee, P. Nikolaev, H. Dai, P. Petit, J. Robert,
C. Xu, Y.H. Lee, S.G. Kim, A.G. Rinzler, D.T. Colbert,
G.E. Scuseria, D. Tomanek, J.E. Fisher, R.E. Smalley,
Science 273, 483 (1996)
C. Journet, W. Maser, P. Bernier, A. Loiseau, P. Deniard, S. Lefrant, R. Lee, J. Fischer, Nature 388, 756
(1997).
M. Buongiorno-Nardelli, B.I. Yakobson and J. Bernhold,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4656 (1998); Phys. Rev. B 57, 4277
(1998).
P. Zhang, P.E. Lammert and V.H. Crespi, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 81, 5346 (1998).
S.J. Tans, M.H. Devoret, H. Dai, A. Thess, R.E. Smalley, L.J. Geerligs, C. Dekker, Nature 386, 474 (1997);
M. Bockrath, D.H. Cobden, P.L. McEuen, N.G. Chopra,
A. Zettl, A. Thess and R.E. Smalley, Science 275, 1922
(1997).
L.C. Venema, J.W.G. Wildöer, H.J.L. Temminck Tuinstra, C. Dekker, A.G. Rinzler and R.E. Smalley, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 71, 2629 (1997).
L.C. Venema, J.W.G. Wildöer, S.J. Tans, J.W. Janssen,
H.L.J. Temminck Tuinstra, L.P. Kouwenhoven and C.
Dekker, Science, 283, 52 (1999).
A. Rubio, D. Sanchez-Portal, E. Artacho, P. Ordejón and
J.M.Soler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3520 (1999).
As a starting point for all the possible cutting mechanisms a strong binding between the tube and the substrate is necessary either chemically or through van der
Waals forces. Experiments [T. Hertel, R. Martel and P.
Avouris, J. Phys. Chem. 102, 910 (1998); Phys. Rev.
B 58 13870 (1998)] and first-principle calculations [16]
show that tubes have a fairly good binding to the gold
substrate. It is typically of the order of 2 meV/atom and
adds up to a significant amount of binding energy for a
tube.
S. Iijima, C. Brabec, A. Maiti and J. Bernholc, J.
Chem. Phys. 104 2089 (1996); M.R. Falvo, G.J. Clary,
R.M. Taylor, V. Chi, F.P. Brooks, S. Washburn and
R. Superfine, Nature 389, 582 (1997).
A. Lordi and N. Yao, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 2509 (1998).
Note that the imaginary part of the inverse dielectric
function for graphite (sheet) has a peak around 6-7 eV,
related to a collective plasma excitation [3]. Geometric
arguments indicate that for a √
cylinder this excitation
should move down in energy by 2.
T. Pichler, M. Knupfer, M.S. Golden, J. Fink, A. Rinzler
and R.E. Smalley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4729 (1998).
W.A. de Heer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 611 (1993); M.
Brack, Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 677 (1993).
A. Rubio, Appl. Phys. A 68 275 (1999). Although interactions with the metallic substrate or other tubes introduces some modifications in the shape of the van Hove
singularities and the opening of pseudogaps, the main
electronic structure is well described by the isolated tube.
A.J. Stone and D.J. Wales, Chem. Phys. Lett. 128, 501
(1986).
V.H. Crespi, M.L. Cohen and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. Lett.
79, 2093 (1997)

6

[35]
[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]
[40]

[41]
[42]

TABLE II. Typical elasticity parameters Y (Young’s
modulus) and σY (yield stress) for different carbon
materials [3] compared to steel. Due to the large anisotropy
in the elastic constants of graphite we add those in parenthesis. They are relevant for the elastic strength and flexibility
of the single wall nanotubes (SWNT).

For C=4πǫ0 /d (per unit area) we then get the final result
for the force given in Eqn.(2).
P. Johansson, R. Monreal and P. Apell, Phys. Rev. B42,
9210 (1990).
It is known from other works (H.F. Budd and J. Vannimenus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 31, 1218 (1973); Phys. Rev.
B12, 509 (1975); S. Andersson, B.N.J. Persson, M. Persson and N.D. Lang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 2073 (1984))
that the classical force used by invoking Eq.(2) actually
reflects an average over the true force acting. There is
also a first order response which we should consider since
our system is truly microscopic. Within linear response
the total force F acting on the ions from an external field
E has to average to zero. We checked that this linear term
contribution is very small in our particular case.
J.M. Soler, A.M. Baro, N. Garcı́a and H. Rohrer, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 57, 444 (1986).
The Young’s modulus, Y=k/ro where ro is an interatomic
distance, will be of the order of TPa (see Table II). As the
shear stress µ = Y /(1 + ν) (where ν ≈ 0.26 is the Poisson [31]) is of the same order of magnitude as the Young
modulus therefore, we concentrate all the discussion of
the cutting on the strain.
C. H. Xu, C. Z. Wang, C. T. Chan, and K. M. Ho, J.
Phys. Condens. Matter 4, 6047 (1992).
More exhaustive calculations have been done in
refs. [11,12] using a semiempirical Tersoff parametrization of the carbon-carbon interaction.
Above this critical value the defect density increases
rapidly with length [12].
Higher resolution and photon intensities can be achieved
by taking advantage of the optical-field enhancement at
the STM-tip when the tip-surface cavity is illuminated on
with a laser. The field enhancement factor is of the order of 1000 for typical STM-tips and substrates as highly
oriented pyrolytic graphite or gold (A.V. Bragas, S.M.
Landi and O.E. Martı́nez, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 2075
(1998)). This new optical microscopy can also be used to
study the linear and nonlinear optical response of carbon
nanotubes and other nanostructures.

Material
Steel
Fullerenes
Diamond
Graphite
Tubes

∗

k (N/m)∗
460
440
960
1560

Do (eV)∗
4.0
3.4
7.4
10.0

σY (GPa)
3
≃ 12
50-90
≃ 40
∼1

b

a

A. Krishnan, E. Dujardin, T.W. Ebbesen, P.N. Yanilos
and M.M.J. Treacy, Phys. Rev. B 58, 14013 (1998).
b
J.P. Salvetat, G.A.D. Briggs, J.M. Bonard, R.R. Bacsa,
A.J. Kulik, T. Stöckli, N.A. Burnham and L. Forro, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 82, 944 (1999)

FIG. 1. Room temperature images of a carbon nanotube
(a) before and (b) after it was cut at three positions marked
with crosses in (a).

FIG. 2. Cutting efficiency versus applied voltage. Efficiency is here defined as the number of successful cuts divided
by the total number of applied pulses at that specific voltage.
About 150 voltage pulses were applied on various nanotubes.
The feedback current was varied between 20 pA and 1 nA;
the feedback voltage between 0.1 V and 3V.

FIG. 3.
Room temperature image of a bundle of nanotubes. An individual nanotube within the bundle, indicated
by the arrow, could be cut by a voltage pulse.

TABLE I. Typical spring constants k [N/m], energy Do
[eV] needed to break a bond at T=0, and equilibrium distances Req (Å) for different carbon bonds. In rough terms
displacing an atom by 0.1 Å corresponds to an elastic energy
change of 5-10 eV.
bond
C-H
C-C
C=C
C≡C

Y (GPa)
200
400
1140
(c11 =1090; c12 =120; c44 =640)
700
(c11 =1060; c33 =36.5; c44 =4.5)
SWNT 1250 a
SWNT-ropes b ∼ 1000
(TB calc. Y=1240; ν=0.26) [31]

FIG. 4. Room temperature images of a strongly bent nanotube (a) before and (b) after it was cut near the two positions
marked with crosses in (a). The three separated tube parts
appear to be displaced as a result of the cutting events. Image
(b) is an enlargement of the area within the square in (a).

Req (Å)∗
1.11
1.52
1.34
1.21

FIG. 5. Density of states of an armchair (10,10) single-wall
nanotube for various applied electric fields perpendicular to
the tube axis. There is an increase of the density of states at
the Fermi level that leads to bond weakening (see text). We
also show the results for a field of 4 eV/Å as the dashed line
in the bottom panel. For comparison the density of states
for a single graphene layer (dash line) is also given in the top
panel.

M.F. Ashby, Acta. Metall. 37, 1273 (1989).

FIG. 6. Schematic description of the strain-induced topological pentagon-heptagon pair defect (Stone-Wales transformation) [24]. The tube axis is in the vertical direction.

7

a

x
x
x
10 nm

b

F ig . 1 . A . R u b io et a l.

Cutting efficiency

1

0
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

Voltage (V)

Fig. 2. A. Rubio et al.

2

3

4

5

6

a
x
x

20 nm

b

20 nm
F ig . 3. A . R u b io et a l.

10 nm

F ig . 4 . A . R u b io et a l.

Fig. 6. A. Rubio et al.

